research.md, before:

---
layout: page
permalink: /research/
title: Research
description: Current research by Susan Bilynskyj Dunning.
tags: [Roman religion, Ludi Saeculares, classics]
image:
  feature: roman-sacrificing.jpg
---

## Dissertation: Roman Ludi Saeculares from the Republic to Empire

Religious rituals provide a key to our interpretation of the events and developments that transformed ancient Roman society. Many of these rites had their origins in a legendary past, and were reshaped in response to socio-political crises and upheavals in the Republic and Empire. The Ludi Saeculares (Secular Games) are a primary example of such a metamorphosis. Ancient traditions held that these Games were performed roughly once every century from their mythic founding in the sixth century BCE until their final celebration in 248 CE. Succeeding generations altered the character of the Games dramatically: a ritual once performed by the Valerian clan as a private act of propitiation to chthonic deities became a public celebration of Rome’s prosperity under the emperors. A study of the Secular Games will bring to light the religious frameworks and political attitudes that lay beneath this radical change.

Despite the importance of the Secular Games to the study of Roman religion, there is a great need for more comprehensive research on the tradition of the Games. Much of the most outstanding scholarship on the subject predates advances in our understanding of the religions and early history of Rome, and more recent works concentrate solely on the Augustan Games of 17 BCE. At the same time, the primary sources for the topic are ripe for reassessment, now that Schnegg-Köhler’s collection of sources relating to the Games with a commentary (2002) has replaced the once-standard work of Pighi (1965). 

I am directing my doctoral research toward significant gaps in scholarship on the Secular Games, specifically: how the Games gradually evolved from rituals traditionally associated with the private religious practices of the Valerii; how changes to the ritual reflect contemporary religious and socio-political concerns in each century, especially in debates over the influence of “Augustan ideology” in the Games of 17 BCE; how Romans perceived their religious tradition across different eras; and how the use of the term *saeculum* on imperial coinages and inscriptions of the second and third centuries became an important tool for defining and presenting emperors’ public images and ideals for their regimes, even in years in which Ludi Saeculares were not held. I utilize a variety of ancient sources, including Zosimus, Censorinus, Livy, the *Res Gestae* of Augustus, coins, and invaluable inscriptions detailing the events of the Games of 17 BCE and 204 CE. My dissertation is divided into five chapters examining the Republican origins of the Games, the Augustan celebration, the Games of Domitian and of Septimius Severus, and the end of the Ludi Saeculares in the third century CE.

Commit message:

Update for 2016-2017
Updated CV, research, and overview, added new courses.

research.md, after:

---
layout: page
permalink: /research/
title: Research
description: Current research by Susan Bilynskyj Dunning.
tags: [Roman religion, Ludi Saeculares, classics]
image:
  feature: roman-sacrificing.jpg
---

## Dissertation: Roman Ludi Saeculares from the Republic to Empire

Religious rituals provide a key to our interpretation of the events and developments that transformed ancient Roman society. Many of these rites had their origins in a legendary past, and were reshaped in response to socio-political crises and upheavals in the Republic and Empire. The Ludi Saeculares ("Saecular Games") are a primary example of such a metamorphosis. Ancient traditions held that these Games were performed every *saeculum* (“age”, “generation”), an interval of roughly 100 or 110 years, from their mythic founding in the sixth century BCE until their final celebration in 248 CE. Succeeding generations altered the character of the Games dramatically: a ritual once performed by the Valerian clan as a private act of propitiation to chthonic deities became a public celebration of Rome’s prosperity under the emperors. My dissertation brings to light the religious frameworks and political attitudes that lay beneath this radical change through the first comprehensive analysis of the history of the Ludi Saeculares. The argument contains two major threads: an analysis of the origins and development of the Games themselves, and the use of the term *saeculum* in imperial rhetoric in literary, epigraphic, and numismatic sources from the early Republic to the fifth century CE.

First, an investigation into Republican sacrifices that constitute part of the lineage of the Ludi Saeculares reveals that these rites were in origin called “Ludi Tarentini”, and were a Valerian gentilician cult that came under civic supervision in 249 BCE. Next, it is shown that in his Saecular Games of 17 BCE, Augustus appropriated the central rites of the Valerian cult, transforming them into “Ludi Saeculares” through a new association with the concept of the *saeculum,* and thereby asserting his role as restorer of the Republic and founder of a new age.

The argument then turns to the development of *saeculum* rhetoric throughout the imperial period, intertwined with the history of the Ludi Saeculares. The fragmentary evidence for the Games of Claudius, Domitian, Antonius Pius, Septimius Severus, and Philip is analysed in greater detail and in the context of the wider history of the Ludi Saeculares. At the same time, a close study of *saeculum* references across various media demonstrates that in years in which the Saecular Games could not be held, an emperor could refer to the *saeculum* of his reign in official coinage and inscriptions as an expression of imperial identity and authority over time. The study ends with an investigation of the cessation of these Games under Constantine I, likely due to the influence of Christianity, and shows that the Ludi Saeculares ceased to be held after 248 CE: references to the Saecular Games in the reigns of later emperors are shown to be misinterpretations of ancient texts or coin legends.
